To changes in a lot of different lipids. Imagine that something like a change in fluidity. You could get this by changing having many different types of fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, monounsaturated fatty acids, fatty acids, those different lengths could all contribute to this. If you have a sensor for something very specific, one unsaturated fatty acid, it could only respond to one of them, saying membrane aggregate property, in the sense, can respond to a lot of different. We'll first talk about lipid sensing and membrane fluidity with focus on this only one pathway. This is a pathway that responds to changes in the membrane fluidity and no brain saturation and unsaturation, the ratio of fatty acids. This is present in yeast, where we have the best known example of this sensing mechanism. But there are similar types of mechanisms at play in other organisms. So just to mention this again, this is something we've talked about earlier, just that fatty acid saturation, more saturation leads to a less fluid membrane. So saturation, meaning completely saturated fatty acid has all these hydrogens in it, no double bonds, unsaturated, you remove some hydrogens and now you have a double bond. Saturated and unsaturated. And unsaturated fatty acid is going to cause a kink in the fatty acid structure. This will pack less well into membrane, and this will tend to be more fluid and more saturated tends to be solid at room temperature or unsaturated, maybe more liquid and fluid. And we can have codes the same subdomains in a membrane that differ in fluidity, like these lithograph structures that we discussed earlier. And so how do we synthesis and how do we respond to this changes in fluidity? In yeast, there is a sole desaturate enzyme. This is an enzyme that takes a saturated fatty acid and converts it into an unsaturated fatty acid. So it desaturates, producing an unsaturated fatty acid, introducing a double bond. And so this is one reason why we understand the pathway. Yeast, it's a little bit simpler. There's a single desaturate enzyme, whereas in humans there are several desaturated. And it gets a little bit more complicated. So Ole one levels are regulated by an ER embedded transcription factor, a set of transcription factors that form homo diagnose mga two and SPT 23. And these are the membrane fluidity sensors see a lot of similarities between this membrane fluidity sensor and SrEp. So it's a transcription factor. It's also membrane embedded in the ER, and it's processed in the transcription factor portion and the cytosol is released, and then it goes on to induce transcription of only one. And there are periods where there's high membrane saturation, decreased fluidity. So this is very similar to what we have discussed with SRVP, with just a little bit of differences in terms of how it's processing. So instead of sensing cholesterol and feeding back and regulating Mph and nuclear reductase in LDLR, this is sensing membrane fluidity in the membrane and regulating the transcription and expression of ole one, which introduces unsaturation membrane. So this is a little bit more detail on this pathway. These are typically present in an inactive homodimeric complex in the yard if there's accumulation of saturated lipids. So we're decreasing the fluidity of the membrane. There's going to be a signal, and we'll talk about how this is actually sensed. There's a signal that results in processing of this protein to release the transfer to go to the nucleus. So in contrast to SrevP, this is processed right in the endoclastic reticulum, whereas SrebP traffics out to the goal gene. It's processed. It's ethical. A little bit different here, but similar in terms of concept. So in response to the increase in saturated fatty acids and decreased in fluidity, there's a change as a sense by this homogeneous ubiquitin. IVSP five is recruited a ubiquitin protein, and then in a process that's not completely understood that AAA ATP is prudent. C 48 likely kind of unfolds the region of the protein, and then there's proteolytic clipping by the protein. This is a really unique event, and typically with the proteasome, we think of complete protein degradation. Usually proteins that are engaging, especially bicklinated proteins with a proteasome, are pulled out of the membrane and is completely clear. For example, with Insig and HMG coveductase, they use a similar pathway right to target. In this case, the proteasome just clips the protein, eclipse it in this loop region, and it releases the active transcription factor that can go to the nucleus, where it regulates the expression transfers in an expression of ole, one that desaturates. So this is a pretty unique case in which the proteasome is just clipping instead of completely degrading proteases there. Here, in the case of this sensor, it's just been clipped by the proteasome itself. And actually this portion of the reaction, when people take in any classes with Michael Rotha's faculty, allosteric changes and how this flipping process is happening. So the question that comes up here is how is this actually detecting this change, and how is it actually being censored? What I told you is that in response to change, the changes in memory and validity, it undergoes its processing. But how is this actually sensed in, and how does this result in processing? We don't completely understand this process, but what is clear is that the sensor is in the transmembrane domain itself. So what's been shown is that within the transmembrane domain, when there's tight lipid packing, these transmembranes have a particular combination with these oriented towards the interior. And when there's loose lipid hacking, these crank membranes respond to this loose lipid hacking. They open up. Okay, so this is the sensor right here, this conformational change, and somehow this is what we don't completely understand. This conformational change results in their processing then by ubiquitation. So the thought, and this is just drawn in cartoony form, you know, it'll be eventually nice to have actual structure of this. The thought is that when there's loose lipid packing here, these tryptophans are pointing outward, these loops are kind of hidden away. When there's tight lipid packing with the high amounts of saturated fatty acids, there's a change where the tryptophans reorient, and then this loop becomes exposed, liquidated and clipped. So some kind of structural change, allowing it then to be recognized and processed. And so, based on molecular dynamic simulations, this is what this would kind of look like. In another view. These transmembranes, being helices, pass through the membrane and having a direct kind of structural sensor right there in the membrane that's responding to those changes in saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. So how this actually results in a conformational change for processing is a little speculative at this point. The thought is that it's exposing these kind of loops for processing that nobody really knows. At this point, it was clear that this is kind of a sensor. And this sensor has also been found now to be present in other proteins. Also, humans, like proteins involved in sensing unfolded protein response, also respond to changes in membrane lipid composition. So it seems to be a generalizable kind of concept of how proteins can respond and sense membrane saturation and fluoride. Any questions on this part? If you have least packing activity, you would get. Yeah, it's kind of a little bit of a mix, right. It would be negative feedback in terms of the kind of loose packing, turning off the sensors. And imagine if you have enough unsaturated fatty acids, you're going to turn this off. It'll decrease expression of ole one. If you have a lot of ole one, increducing desaturation, this will eventually negatively feed back on the cell kind of regulation. But certainly if you have kind of tight lipid packing here, then you have a feedback forward to increase old one expression. So in this way, it kind of reaches a balance mainly, and this is, I think, why we first understood it in yeast, is that they only have one desaturate sometimes, which makes this handling a simple kind of circuit and feedback regulation. Other questions? So the main points here is that only one is a desaturated enzyme. So it's going to introduce unsaturation in the fatty acids. And there are two homo dimeric transmembrane ER proteins that act as the membrane fluidity sensors. And it's a sensor because it has some kind of change or response to the change in membrane fluidity. And as it's connected to some kind of factor, right, to mediate a change in response to this alteration in fluidity, it's connected to transcriptional changes by extraction of this transcription factor. So the other sensing mechanism I wanted to talk about today is how we sense the amount of phospholipids in our membranes. This is going to be based on packing of the phospholipids. And we'll also talk about an example here of how this mediates and maintains enough fatty acids, or, sorry, phospholipids, or with a drop of emergence and the consequences that would occur if we didn't have enough phospholipids for lipidrons. So this mechanism is mediated by the rate lending enzyme in phosphatidylcholine synthesis. So phosphatidylcholine pc is a phospholipid and it's the major and most common phospholipid in our cells. And it's the major membrane phospholipid in the vast majority of it's synthesized through this pathway. So it's synthesized by the transfer of choline from CPP choline to diatroplitroline by converting phosphate. And there's some feedback regulation that happens here. The question being here, how do cells know when membranes need more oxidative bullet? And how is this communicated to this pathway to ensure that we have enough cdb choline to convert ag to more Pc? And so the answer here, here is that CCT itself, this rate limiting enzyme is the sensor for this. And sensing and controlled activity is directly controlled by phospholipids packing. So when you have phospholipids, have these head groups on the top of the phospholipid. And if the membrane has sufficient amounts of phospholipids, these are going to pack in very tightly and cause phospholipids hacking. If you have less phospholipids, there's going to be room in between those phospholipid head groups. It's going to cause less reduced packing. This can be not enough phospholipids, or this can be a difference in the ratio of something like phosphodidylcholine to something like diacyglycerol, which would have a really tiny, tiny, has no head group, it's just diaziglycerol, no phosphide head group. And so this kind of would be a big space between these phospholipids. So CCT is going to be recruited to membranes with low phospholipid packing. So if you don't have enough phospholipids, there's space between them, and then CCT can be recruited to these membranes. And the recruitment release autoinhibition of the enzyme itself and its activity. So this has a really interesting structure. So here's the enzyme. It has an active site here in this globular region. It's all found in the cytosol, and it's in an autoinhibited state here, where this gold helix is binding here active site. So this is in an inhibited state. So it's not mediating that reaction, not providing substrate that can be used to generate phosphoid. This would be a situation which you don't need any more pc, right? Your membranes just have enough pc to ratio. You start to lack phosphor in the membrane. You start to get these packing defects. This helix is an amphipathic defects, and it's going to recognize those packing defects. So the packing defects will hydrophobic radius of the membrane and then it's able to insert. So an anthropathic helix is a helix which has a non polar base, if we prefer kind of a hydrophobic portion, insert into the membrane and has a polar face, an aqueous loving surface. And so under conditions in which there's a lot of membrane, it's alkyl, nonpolar face, goes into the enzyme and inhibits it. If we have hacking defects in here, it's able to insert, and the insertion of the helix opens up this active site and it's able to now perform its chemical reaction, provide ct, choline or pc synthesis. So this is just shown here in illustration. This helix is going to be the key sensing mechanism of this enzyme. So the helix, if there's enough pc present, it's going to bind up to this enzyme and inhibit it. If there's not enough pc, you're going to start to get spaces in between these phospholipids here. What's kind of, I don't know if you can see this, it's strong. Here are some phospholipids with kind of yellow balls, and then they have what looks like some CAG, which is glycerol into fatty acid. So there's some spaces. This allows the helix to insert into the membrane and it relieves that autoinhibition. This becomes active, it produces a substrate and can make pc. Does this make sense? So in the case of n, of only one, or SRDP, that's a transcriptional cascade and a sensing mechanism based on new protein expression. This sensing mechanism is directly in the rate limiting enzyme itself. So using this helix, the practicing defense. Okay, so I wanted to present an example of this with lipid droplets and take us back to our discussions on lipid droplets and also discuss the consequences of what happens to lipid droplets. We don't have enough membrane pc. And this came from a really nice genetic screen. So we talked about different approaches to genetic screens, talked about pooled genetic screens and also arrayed genetic screens. When this screen was done, this was from Bob Paris and Peter Walter at UCSF. This was 2007, 2008. This was published. And this was so pre crispr, right precas nine. This was rnai siRNA. And this was pretty cool screens. They just did this in array format screen. This was in Drosophila s two cells, and they just screened every gene in an array format. And they did this looking for changes in lipidropolis, for changes in abundance. They looked at changes in morphology, they looked at changes in clustering, and they kind of grouped these genes that when depleted at different phenotypes of droplets. And this is one benefit, again for an arrayed screen done with microscopy as you can, phenotypes that might change clustering or distribution of droplets, that would be they had this one condition where they depleted some of these enzymes or genes and they saw these massive fluid droplets shown here. So here's end of control. And you see this other condition, really big droplets, one gene that when depleted results in really big droplets is sapin. They didn't see that. Here they have scap, which is one that's familiar to us. This is a fatty acid synthase, fast. And they had cct one and cct two. These are both those CCT enzymes that are critical for phosphatelcholine synthesis. Right. These enzymes that are sensing changes in phosphate membrane packing and mediating the synthesis of new membranes. So they followed up on this in more detail in this paper and another paper. And two experiments that they did was first to just look at and validate the, and confirm the findings. So they use siRNAs to complete the transcript. They get less cct one, they get these huge lipid droplets. These are tek ganto droplets. And this is just another image in kind of three dimensional reconstructions. And we can even start to think here about how this happened, right, we know expansion, that's one way we can get a really big droplet. We also know the droplets, right. This is another way to get a big droplet. We can start to think about the mechanisms of how this might happen. The other experiment they did here was looking at CCP one in this case, and they tagged it in theory, which fluoresces red under control conditions. They saw very little colloquialization of their droplets in green with their CCT in red. CCT mostly seemed to be present in the nucleoplasm, diffuse in the nucleus structure, but very little on the drop of when they added a fatty acid. So this stimulates the production of lipid droplets. They saw really nice recruitment of CCT to the surface. So now you see the rings of CCT on the outside of the droplet, which is interesting. We know CCT is recruited to membranes that have poor packing, right, by that amphipathic helix. And this thing suggests that CCT maybe is being recruited. There was a poor hacking to mediate the synthesis of new phosphatidyl folate. That would be one hypothesis. So they wanted to look at the mechanism of what's happening where they don't have pc and they don't have CCT one to make new pc, and they looked at droplet growth and what they ultimately saw was on fusion. So we're getting massive amounts of droplet fusion. So we can look at fusion using time lapse imaging to look to see if droplets can contact and then to look to see if they did. These two droplets here separated hc, and then these droplets make a contact here. And then we start to see the fusion of the. So this is a little bit of a different mechanism from what we talked about in terms of fusion with the side proteins. Discussing proteins side a, B and C. And in those cases, there's a protein that localizes the contact and opens a channel between them. We can study that by FraP, and this allows for fusion. In this case, what's appearing to happen is that when we have droplets growing, imagine all this droplets growing and all this tricep glycerol, very hydrophobic oil, and it's in this water environment and you need enough membrane around it for it to be happy. So this is a surface to volume problem. So as it grows, you need to make more membrane. If you don't have that, you start to get spontaneous fusion, because you can store more neutral lipid in a bigger droplet with a lower amount of surface area phospholipids. So this results in spontaneous droplet. So this is kind of summarized in this illustration here. So what they're seeing is that under kind of basal conditions, they have no droplets, one mostly existing here in the nucleoplasm and a soluble form in the nucleus. And it has a helix. Remember, that's auto inhibiting the enzyme. That's the sensor, the sensor for hacking defects in response to the addition of oleate. You're making a bunch of droplets. Droplets need phosphatidylcholine on their surface. It has this helix can insert and associate with the droplets and can help make new pc on the droplet surface. And this helps stabilize the droplets. And you have nice amount of these, kind of small with the droplets. If you have a situation. This was shown here as these kind of grow and expand, what you can see is that here they're completely covered with, with pc. All these pc represented as these purple circles tightly, all kind of packed in around the droplet. As you start to grow the droplet with more and more oleate, you start to get these spaces between those purple circles, right, and these would be hacking defects. And then this is rectified by our sensor. That amphipathic helix inserts into these spaces, the packing defects, and can start to catalyze that reaction to make more CDP colon. This is responding to the packing defects, inserting, making more cpp. Choline makes more membrane to stabilize the droplets. This is what we see here. Now we have some nice droplets. They're all covered now a bit larger, all covered with more pc. If you didn't have CCt one, if we had this situation and no cct one, we have all these packing defects exposed. All this hydrophobic lipid that's being exposed to aqueous cytosol. Right. And this is like oil and water. If you mix oil and water, this is really unfavorable. And it's going to spontaneously want to separate to minimize the amount of surface area of the oil that's in contact with water. This happens just if you mix oil and water. And that also is what's happening here. So now we have all this exposed oil with the aqueous cytosol and it wants to minimize that surface area. Now we're going to start to fuse to minimize that. And this is minimizing the exposed surface area and maximizing the ability of this very small amount of phosphatidyl chlorine to cover that surface area. Does that make sense? So that's why they're getting these huge fused droplets. So a little different from the side protein mediated droplets. So the key points here are that CCT is the rate limiting enzyme involved in phosphatidylcholine synthesis. And low phospholipid packing mediates CCT recruitment in that it inserts into membranes, relieving that auto in commission. So the real sensing mechanism here is that helix and then the effector portion is that then it can synthesize CD choline and make new pc to cover membranes and organ methods and lipid graphics is a really extreme example of this because it has so much storage, that's very hydrophobic. So it really requires memory to cover this. I just want to mention a few common principles of these lipid sensors. We've gone over a few different ways to sense different lipids. We can sense cholesterol and SrEp, scap and insig making sense membrane fluidity here the transcription factors, and regularly only one, the desaturates. And we have another example now of sensing. There are many, many other examples. So, first of all, in terms of general membrane sensors, we can think about many things that could be sensed, and we won't go through how all of these are sensed. We talked about saturation. Imagine that the thickness of the membrane is going to be some bending of membranes and shape. When you think about the ER and the amount of tubules and sheets, this is also sense to regulate the shape squeezing of membranes, the kind of biophysical properties and membrane tension charge, the amount of P's mediating the electrostatic environment of the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane. Hacking curvature. These are all things that are sensed. And there are always to our cells in substance responses with different mechanisms and effectors. One of the key principles here is that sensors. Sensors are going to be structurally metastable, so they'll have an on and an off type of composition. There are two good examples of this MDA. Two having an alternative dimer compositions with those transmembrane helixes opening or closing in response to the fluidity of the membrane. With CCT, we have inserting and mediating autoinficient in the response to unpacking little packing of phospholipids. This can insert. And this opens up these two. And on off confirmations of the sensor. And the lipid is going to modulate this unobstruction. So often these are metastable. They're kind of sampling both kind of states in some way. And then they're going to be favored by lipid conformations and configurations. Any questions on this? Okay, I think we can end a little early today, and then on Friday, we'll go through some of the thought questions that were in the handouts.