Music and dance and then its opposite is grass. And that means strong and it doesn't necessarily mean bad. There are good characters who are, and there are bad characters who are halus. So you can have a refined evil guy and you can have like in the Mahabharata, which I hope you read those scenarios, synopses by now. Mahabharata is about these five brothers and they're each, they're really half brothers and each has its own attribute. And the number one brother, Yudhistira is very refined and number two brother is Bhima. He's really big and tall, he has a deep voice and he is kind of the epitome of grass, but he's really good. So. And everybody is sort of a combination of all. And there are many gradations in between. And when we get to lion after the semester break, the spring break, you'll see in the lion the shadow puppets themselves. You can see in the iconography, these character types. Just by looking at the puppet you'll know big eyed characters are grass, really small eyed characters are refined. And then there are many in between gradations. And there's another kind of side thing, which is an Indonesian word and that means coarse or base. And so that is more of a derogatory term. So in addition to these two alus and kras, we have these three different gender categories. Male, female, female, and what's called babanchi, which is sort of an androgynous category. And these are built in. These have been centuries built into Balinese traditional arts. So the character that comes out onto the stage immediately will present either male, female or balanchi and karas or halus or somewhere in between. Right away you'll know from just this very first dance, which is called agam. And agam is a basic tradition and tomorrow you're going to get to see it first in live. And I'm not a dancer, but it's sort of like for a female, it's sort of like this, it's leaning one way. And you're going to have a dance workshop where you get to learn do it too, which is always fun. And there's like agam on the right and agam on the left. And the character comes out and immediately goes into that ogam position and that, you know what kind of character type that character is. The male Ogam is very different from the female high shoulders. Question I just want to like check out. Is the Ogam like a specific, specific dance move or is it the whole dance? It's just a move Got it. Thank you. So if there's a vocabulary of dance movements that all dances are made up of, and it depends kind of what style dance you're doing, what genre, like Gamboo will have its own and Legong will have its own, and a lot of them are shared as well. So like Gambu, which I've been talking about a lot, the ensemble that has come up accompanied by the flute. So flute playing the melody that is said to be like the origin of all female dance movements. So if you learn a female part in Ganga, you will understand, you'll have that vocabulary to then take to other kinds of female roles, even in more modern dances. So you got Agam Sladet is another one. And that's an aye movement from side to side. And we're also going to be seeing a film probably next week, Bali beyond the Postcard, where you can really see a lot of that. It's about a friend of mine, actually, and she's the granddaughter of my drum teacher, and she's teaching her daughter to dance Legong. And it's a very fun and interesting movie. So slidet is this movement, and you'll see it again on Thursday. Ankso, you've already heard that word, and it's a very important word for you to already have down. And that is like this articulation or a rhythmic break in the music. It can also mean a cue. There isn't really one English word to translate for anxo, but it means all those things, and in the music it manifests brick. So we have like, we're playing our protecon over and over melody, our cycles. And the amso gives the music its shape, and it's usually cued by the drummer. But when you have certain types of dances, the dancer gives the cue. The dancer decides when to do the aamso and cues the drummer to cues the musicians, but. Or the rest of the musicians. But the musicians in the gamelan need to be able to understand the cues because if they waited for that chain of events, they'd be too late to do the onsil. So they're following the dance, and we're going to see that in action on Thursday. And this idea of shifting of weight and walking, each of these, each character type has a special walk, a special way to shift weight, special kind of rhythm them slow moving, fast moving, and then there are specific floor patterns. And so if you're at all used to dancing, you probably understand what that term is. It's the use of space. And usually the dancer will Dancers will come out from the center of the stage. Sometimes there is an actual curtain, but with a lot of dances there isn't. And they'll come in the center. And then for different dances, there are different floor patterns. So Legon always has this kind of figure 8 way of moving and we'll see about those. And then this idea that. And I don't know if they'll talk about this on Thursday, but in previous dance demos, the dancer has talked about this idea of the energy being transmitted through the ground up into the body. And we had a great analogy. We had a similar one with the Georgian singers, where the weighted kind of movement in the dance while they were singing and mudras. And you should know that term by now. And that term comes. Do you have a question? No. Oh, you don't? No, I don't. Feel free to ask questions anytime. So the mudra is something that comes from India. Even the term is used in India, It's a Sanskrit word and it's used by the priests, the High Brahmin priests, and they have specific significance when they're using it. It is also used in the dance. And as I've mentioned before, in Balinese dance, most of the mudras do not have meaning like they do in Indian dance. And then there are a lot of movements derived from nature, like lizard crawling up a tree or picking flowers, and they're incorporated into specific choreographies. The human body reflects the macrocosm and the idea of twos and threes. So we have this. Two different things going on. We have the. And in the. Actually in the Judith Becker article you read, which was about Java, a lot of you noted how she talked about duality, but also simplicity. So this idea of duality is very important in Balinese dance and pretty much every. A lot of things in Balinese life. So there's Aurobaneda, these complementary opposites, and also these three part the head, the torso, the legs and feet, which is also the way people talk about the musical form. So the body is also obviously the physicality of that. So the Three Worlds of Bali was the film we watched some of. And I finally just uploaded it so you'll be able to watch it on your own. We're actually going to come back to it when we get. So just when you get a chance. And there were viewing questions and they had me up. And so all of these are reflected in the body and in dance and in music. So there are different ways of conceiving of theatrical performance, but they're pretty There are a number of them, but they're pretty thick in a way. So of the possibilities in traditional Balinese theater. So I'm using the word traditional here to mean a lot of the dance forms that we'll be looking at, as opposed to contemporary dance that breaks out of those kind of norms. So the idea of the story at the center is very important in traditional dance. When Gong Keviar came along in 1915 or whatever, early 20th century, that was one of the big things. They broke away from the idea of having to tell a story all the time. But a lot of the traditional dance forms have specific stories associated with them. So they'll think of Legong, okay, that's the Lawson story, that's this story. Those are Javanese tales about Kanji. And they'll think, oh, those are Mahabharata stories or Ramayana stories, etc. And the idea of oral formulaity, and I mentioned this earlier this semester, I didn't really go into it. There was a professor here, Amin Sweeney, who specialized in Malaya shadow play, and he wrote a lot about this oral formulaiity. And he has a great book called A Full Hearing that takes apart oral formulaity and he applies that analysis to Malay storytelling, not just shadow theater, but other kinds of storytelling. And this idea was developed by Milman, Harry and Albert Lord back in the early 20th century as a play applied to the Iliad and the Odyssey. So actually, Lord went. He wanted to understand, how is it that all these storytellers can recite endless hours of stories? How do they retain that knowledge? And he looked at. And, you know, the Iliad and the Odyssey were transmitted tales they set down. And this is true of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana and the Bible. I mean, so many sacred narratives of the people that explain about how we came to be were originally orally transmitted. And if you look at fairy tales, that's true as well. So an example of that Cinderella is really was based on an ancient Chinese tale from the 4th century or so. So we think Cinderella, okay, what's your first thought? Disney or Grimm's Fairy tales? We've got these fixed ideas of what these fairy tales, where they came from. But the way. So the way that these scholars studied them, they broke them down into these formulaic chunks, they saw that these storytellers were improvising, but they were putting together formulae. So I want to give you an example. If you were to tell, if you were going to start a fairy tale, how would you say it? Once upon a time. Once upon a time, right That's a formula. So it's a formula that we know. And if you say once upon a time, you're not expecting to hear a news report or a sacred narrative per se, and then how would you end it? Somebody else. Yeah, yeah, that's one way. What's another? If you were to lengthen that a little bit, like a fairy tale. Yeah. So that's. They were always done. Yeah. So, I mean, maybe they didn't, but that is very common. That's a very common formula. And I've done a lot of study of Brilliant balance. And they're all, you know, formulaic. And so you see these chunks and you see that in all kinds of pop music as well. And in fact, the way we speak, we are not putting together individual words. When we talk, we already have phrases in our head. And then when we're putting together, like, popular phrases, we're drawing something up from our experience and sharing that with whatever world. You're. So oral formula is really important in all kinds. It's important in music as well, where you get these formulae that are put together. And you could say, oh, that piece sounds so much like that piece, and say, yeah, they got that idea from that person. Well, in Bali, that's not a problem. There's not an idea of copyright where you're analyzing every note and say, oh, that's okay. I'm going to sit that person for using that phrase. Because that's just the way things are composed. And shadow puppetry is especially like that. And a lot of the theater is like that. So the story is just a means to the end. It's a vehicle for the filler, which is something that Amin Sweeney used to talk about. So the filler is what's interesting. So you'll have a. A mass dance drama that is bringing news to the community. And they might be basing it on some. There is some plot there, but it can get lost in all the side stories. And how creative that performer is is what's special if they just come out and tell a story. That's not considered live theater in Bobby, and I think I mentioned this before, an oral approach to the written word. So it's not that everything is orally transmitted. People use different kinds of manuscripts. They study them, and then they go back and they use them in performance. So this is a friend of mine, Koman Harjanagara, and he's a dalang. And this. You can see him reading a palm leaf manuscript. And he has in his house, and he's the son and the grandson, and the great grandson of Dalang. So they have been collecting these for many generations. All this whole wall of their house is full of Islam tar and they're made of palm leaf and they deteriorate over the years. And so there is this idea of creative copying where people wouldn't just copy verbatim. They feel like they need to make it better and to update it, to be creative. So when we look at a lontar, maybe 100 years old, we don't really know what it's. We can't really rely on it being, you know, like it's not like a stone inscription or something or a metal plate or something or some, you know, things published in print. But it's a lot of information. And they're written in Kawi, Old Javanese or old Balinese as well. So in Balinese. So we have various assumptions and conventions in traditional Balinese theater. So common features, the stories are at the center and they reference specific time periods and everybody's aware of that, all the audience. And they have multiple languages that index historical periods of the Balinese past. And this is really important because it's such a multilingual society. Kawi is a really important word for you to know and it means Old Javanese and it's kind of. That's how it's often translated. It actually has versions, elements of Old Balinese in it. It's a literary language. So I always say it's kind of like Latin here. So some people study Latin. So if you go to some mass or something and you know Latin, then you'll understand it. But a lot of people don't. And yet they can go through the whole ceremony without knowing that. And likewise you can go to a lion and enjoy the whole thing without understanding Kawi. But then you'll have people in the audience who do understand and they'll get these other layers of meaning. And you also have high, middle and low Boladese and the use of an interpreter. So that is where, like it's similar to the idea of creative copying where you have somebody updating whatever it is. So you have like Kawi, someone's doing a Kawi reading, there's somebody interpreting it and saying, this king did this, but I believe this. And they're elaborating on it and bringing it to life, making it relevant to the present day. And in terms of who speaks those languages in theater, it has to do with their station in life, their rank. If they're noble, they're going to speak Kawi if they're a lower caste person, they're going to speak Balinese, maybe modern day Balinese, but when they speak to the noble person, they have to use kawi or it can be low, middle and high Balinese if there's no kawi in that particular form of theater. So the lower caste people have to really know a lot of language in order to be able to. Because it's different vocabulary, it's completely different words. And another really important convention is the integration of sung, text, dance and music. So it's very rare. You'll have just a play where the actors are just reading their lines or saying, improvising their lines. Even in Huayang, you're going to have the dalang breaks into song all the time. There are different kinds of songs that signify different things, different languages, characters sing and. Yeah. Are any of the wayang done in Bahasa Indonesia? Occasionally, yeah, but it's pretty rare. Yeah, I mean they have some in English for tourists too, but it's pretty rare. I guess more and more nowadays Indonesia is Indonesian is being used by the young people like just in their daily lives. So I wonder how that's going to impact Wayan, you know, because the way an I studied was from my teacher who was already old in the 80s, telling me about remembering his teacher from the 1930s, who remembered his teacher from the 20th, early 20th century, where all these things were so important to him. And he was already in the 80s complaining, oh, they shortened wyoung and they're not doing this kind of story anymore. And they're not doing that. And that was then, that's almost 50 years ago. So things have been kind of schmidt. And I think probably maybe Indonesian in theater is more common. And it depends on the dalang too. So there's a really popular one who uses Indonesian a lot. Okay. Yeah. So the older the form, the more abstract. So like gambu is very abstract. There's not really speaking in it except that there's a kind of stylized speech where the dancers will do this kawi kind of inflected. It's not really meant to be understood. And people follow the story through mime, it being mimed out. But it's not a kind of form that has thousands of people flocking to see it. So when they have the art festival in Denbasar, there's a big stadium that seats 2,000 people there, not sure how many. And they would never put gambu in there because you don't get they'll have gambu in a really tiny theater where you'll just get this very kind of literati, kind of group of people who appreciate it. So I talked about this before when we were looking at the temple ceremony and how there has to be different periods of time represented. So in Wayang, you have the Indian epics there, you have Sanskrit mantras, you have kawi for nobility, and the servants translate into vernacular. So these are all representative of different time periods. In Gambu, Legong and Chalaram, the one you're going to be looking at next week, it evokes Hindu Java, whereas Wayang is supposed to evoke India. So farther past, a more distant past, Gambu is more the Hindu Javanese period. And then Topang, which is a solo male masked dance drama that is considered to be more relevant, more recent past that describes to tell stories about these historical chronicles. And I know I mentioned this before, but that it could include all sorts of fantastical things like demons and things that magic appearing. But it's also based on actual history. And in Topang, which I hope we're going to be able to demonstrate on Thursday, the refined characters wear full mask, doesn't have a mouth, and so they don't speak. And they're supposed to be ancestral visitation. And then you get these comic servants with half masks, so you can see their mouths moving and they speak. So all of even if it's a tragedy, it's told through humor. They always come on and joke around and elaborate. And this is true in Wayang as well, where the humor is really important. And then in modern, more modern kind of dances, you have these free dances that I mentioned earlier today, where sometimes nationalist themes are things like harvesting dance or weaving dance or what I hope you're going to see on Thursday is Tarunajaya, which is the dance of the changing moods of youth, which is a fantastic dance. And then in Sengratari, which is even more. It's part of the. The caviar 20th and 21st century, you actually have characters that speak and you'll have a narrator who might speak Indonesian. So some of the basic elements of these conventions of entrances and opening, the prince. And this has to do with the hierarchy. So the social hierarchy is always represented. So the prince would be preceded by court official, who was preceded by heralds. So it's sort of the lower down people enter first and then the prince and likewise the chandong. And that's that important. And if you haven't written that down yet, write it down. Chandom, remember, C is pronounced like ch is the maidservant character and she precedes the princess and the song. Spatial layout of entrances. Each character will remain in the doorway for a long time, demonstrating their character. And then this vocabulary of movements, and I mentioned this before, this idea of shaking the curtain. So if it's a topang, if it's a mask dance, there's an actual curtain and the dancer shakes the curtain. You don't know what mask is going to come out. And then they surprise people when they come out. When it's a dancer like Legon or in Gambu, there's no curtain, but they do this movement. It's like shaking a curtain and then opening the curtain. And that's an important beginning of many dances. Agam, which I mentioned, is basic stance, sledet, the eye movement. And you have this in your book Ang SEO. And there are different kinds of ansel, which we're going to go over on Thursday in the demo. And some dances have a fixed sequence of onsels. Like Legong is a female dance where it's through composed from beginning to end. All the onsels are built in. So if you're playing the gamelan, you know it's going to be three times loud or four times. You might still get some cues from the drummers, depending on the size of the space. If you they reach the place yet that you need to do that onsel, but it's all set prefixed and then you have free on souls. And that is in solo male dances such as Topang, the dance, mass dancing and bodies. And you're going to definitely see bodies on Thursday because one of the dancers who's here is famous for doing bodies. That's his whole feeder's like Bobby's champion when he was a kid and now he's an older adult. So you have these qualities that are represented, that are embodied. So you can just kind of see a character type and hear a character type can be have a falsetto voice, a high voice, narrow eyes, a fixed smile. And a lot of times the movement is closer to the body and more curvaceous. And the floor pattern will be more curvaceous. So the idea of not moving in a straight line, not being direct, not being away from your body, not kicking your leg out or something. So a lot of movements in close to the body. And the karas and casa are very coarse, large eyes. And some. An example of these characters would be servants with half masks. And the idea is in social interaction too, especially in Java. And I know this class is on Bali, but Miri Anto often gives this as an example where, you know, like somebody's motorcycle's broken down and somebody just comes along and says, oh, I'm really good at motorcycles, I'll fix it for you. And then they don't. And somebody else says, well, I don't really know anything, but they really do. And then they fix it, you know, so this idea of admiring someone who is more kind of self effacing and quiet as opposed to somebody who's bragging and. Or just kind of more forthright. And another teacher of mine used to, he was Javanese and he would talk about how you go to your neighbor's house to borrow something, a cup of sugar. And you spend a half an hour talking about their child and their family and their parents and da, da, da. And then, by the way, could I borrow a cup of sugar or Excuse me, but you. I think my foot is underneath your foot. He used to give that as an example. You don't just say, ah, you're standing on my foot. So specific character. There are specific characters as well. So you've got character types and then specific ones. So Chandung is interesting because she's specific, but she exists in a lot of different stories. So she's in Gambu, but she's in Arja, which is the sung dance drama, people say, the opera of Bali. She's in Laigong. And other characters like the king or the princess or Panji, who is a Javanese folk hero, there is a specific character who appears. Arjuna is one of the Pandava brothers, Rama and Sinta, you know, all of those characters are very specific. And another important thing that will come into play with your Chala Nagar is that no story is played out to the end. And this idea of cyclicity, that you can keep doing the same story again and again and again. And in Mayan, people really don't like to do the end of the Bharati Yuda, the final battle. They prefer not to do that to the very end. And they want it to be inconclusive at the end in certain aspects. And performance in many cases is what we call methamusicology, performativity, a performative act, which is you do the performance to cause something to change. And an example would be a wedding ball, say I do. That's a performative act where you feel something has changed from the doing of the thing. And a lot of these, La Chawanang is a perfect example of that. The one you guys are going to be analyzing is a staged production. It's not the One in the temple where people go into trance. But you're going to be viewing some of those because I'm going to be shifting links with you so that you can get a sense of what those are like. And so here is. This is from a lectum from a few years ago where Sudamani was here. And I'll just show you some. You're going to see similar things on Thursday. But this one's so great because they're side by side. It's Agam with four different types of characters. So I'm going to just let you hear it. So it's the basic. Can you hear it louder, a little loud? So this is kind of a fundamental body position for the right side. So you can see the weight is on the right side. The right hand is higher on all the different characters and the left hand is lower, but the use of the feet is different. Use of the body is different. You see a. On your far left is kind of leaning more and she's a little bit lower. Ayuka is kind of a stronger position. Her body's a little more straight. Is the refined male character. So his feet are a little bit further apart and his shoulders are not completely lifted, but they're squared. And PA on your far right is a strong male attractor. So his hands are kind of more moving. The whole hand is moving rather than just the finger. Expression in the body is much kind of more powerful external. So this is the left body position. So we have the same movement for all characters. It's shading your eyes from the sun and I move it and going back to the right side. There's a specific way that you transfer your weight and go back to the other side and slid back the eye movement, different ways of walking. You can see refined characters with the male and female. Don't go in such a straight line as the stronger characters being either the male and female. The feet also you can see in the stronger characters comes further off the ground, whereas the. The male as well as female characters is more fluid. So that's just the introduction to how. Okay, so there is close coordination between the dance and the movement. Usually the drummer serves as the link between the dancer and the music. And dance can be seen as an offering to the gods, spirits and ancestors. But as I mentioned earlier, one dancer that I spoke with who's very revered, said she feels like it's not the offering, it's the way you give the offering. So it's sort of the doing of dance is the offering not the dance. Itself, there's a lot of communal involvement and there are music and dance specialists that many others can perform. A lot of little children learn dance and the narrative traditions form the basis. So the role of music in theater and dance in classical plays, the music is continuous. And in your cholarang that you're going to be analyzing, it's continuous from beginning to end. So your cholarang is a dance drama that is about 30 minutes long or 25 minutes long. And it goes from one dance, one character, another character enters, and each one is accompanied by a different piece of music. So there are specific pieces for characters and actions and specific collatomic meters. So we did that in our demo and in the class on Thursday, the follow up, and you have that in your book, all the examples of Babtel and Gilac and those different. Each one has a certain feel to it, an underlying kind of mood. So in general, shorter cycles are more intense, creating a mood of agitation, less opportunity for melody. And so you can just hear the gong, gong, gong, as opposed to gong, Melody, melody, melody. I love dancing gong. And so in general, larger, longer cycles portray refinement. And you're going to see this. And it's not just the character, but it's the situation. So if it's a mellow situation, you're not going to have batel, but if it's a fight scene, you will. And the drummer player finds a link between the dancer and the gondola, determining and cueing the angels. So when is the ansel. What kind of angles? There's so many different kinds of angles, different kinds of rhythm, rhythmic patterns, just so many tempo. So the drummer is giving us the tempo, how loud the music is, dynamics, the progression of the piece, when to transition to the next piece or the next section of a piece, if it's one multisectional dance piece and transitions to other pieces or other sections. So that's all cued by the kendan player. So the kenned player has to know everything in order to play Kandan. So we went through these. I'm not going to go through these again right now. And you can go through them on your own in your book in chapter four. I put this up before when we were talking about the Odalan. But this fills in that old middle new category chart from the first chapter with specific associations. It's the old associated with priests, considered to be the oldest, often associated with what's called Bali Agha. And Bali Agha means pre Hindu Bali. So there are some communities that are pre Hindu and They still are going strong. And I talked about those rare seven tone ensembles, Salon ding and gambang and luang. Those are from. They're considered to be pre Hindu, not Javanese influence. And they're the most sacred wali. They're closely linked to the ritual activities. And usually there's no drum, rabab or su ling because these are considered to be Java derived. And they're mostly slab type instruments rather than gong chimes. And like Gun Bear is an example of that. So the examples are here, the four sacred ensembles. And this is all in your book, just talking it through, so you wouldn't know how to read it. Middle category associated with courts. And they're thought to have developed Hindu Javanese model courts. They're associated with the old Javanese narratives and poetic texts. Panji is that folk hero that's very important. And the story of Erlanga, this intermarriage between the Javanese and Balani's nobility in the 11th century. And they're considered to be babali ceremonial. So they're revered and performed alongside but not in the ritual. That's the distinction here between wali and babali. And they do have drums, they can have rabab and su ling. And all of the ensembles are thought to have developed from gambu. But you also have gone gadet, that really big gadet means big bronze ensemble. So I like those are the two parents of present day gamelan, the very heavy bronze ensemble, Gangadet and then the flute ensemble. So you have the lyricism of the flutes. In modern day gamelin you have smaller. And then this should also include 21st century. But this is when it really changed was in the 20th century. These were developed from this middle category. And in the 21st century and also late 20th century, a lot of the newer pieces borrowed from this first category. So when we get to a gong pbr, we'll hear section of a piece that has a gumbung and rhythm, that five plus three rhythm. And that's now part of almost every gong composition since the 1980s. But it wasn't in the early days. And this is another chart in your book of just the most prominent genres. So why I am kulit and the story and what it's accompanied by, what's the tuning? I have S, S for solandro, P for pelog, 7P for pelog, 5 tone. Is there a dalang or an interpreter? D for dalang, I for dalang and interpreter. Here's interpreter. And who are the actors? So shadow puppets, Gambu, they're men traditionally and now women too, but actually now men again. So originally initially it was men only who did Gambu. And then pretty much the whole 20th century women played female roles and men played male roles. And now there's this big resurgence of going back and having men play all the roles. So you see men playing female and male roles as well. Not always, but that's a fashionable thing. So we have Le Gong and Barong and the Barong is part of the Chalon Narang dance drama. So the Barong and I'll go into it more next week. But it's that figure that could be derived from the Chinese lion dance where you have two dancers, one operating the head and one the legs. And you've seen some pictures of that and it's sort of like the quintessential emblem of good goodness in the village. A protector of the village. And Ranga is the evil witch. And it's much more complex than that. It's not good versus evil but a lot of times if you google it, that's what you're going to see. Good versus the battle between good and evil. But it's much more complex than that. And you're going to be reading about that this coming week. And these are a few others on Thursday as I mentioned. I think we're going to Obviously Bodies, which is the modern day bodies, is a solo male dance that every little boy learns and it contains all the elements of male dance. So if you learn bodice you should be able to do a whole bunch of other dances. So here's the Gambu and you've seen this before. And I'll just play a little bit because I want you to remember what it sounds like and remember that melody is played on these flutes. And later they took those melodies and transferred them over to bronze and they sound completely different. They have Kotech on and very different kind of sound but you could trace the same melodies. The pop up you can hear the bomb cycle controlled by the drummers. So this is the entrance music for the Chandong and that's the Chandang character special. Block it. Watch her eyes. That's L eye movement is timed to the gong. So it almost looks like she's causing the gongs death. Mary Vast Wonder and her attendance. Attendance to the Princess. And it's almost like slow motion dance compared to modern day Balinese dance. And it's very linked to very smooth motion. This is all fixed choreography. The Tesla where they speed up and you can tell because they're all doing the Same thing. Okay, so something that we're going to demonstrate for you on Thursday is this distinction between fixed choreography and free choreography. So two different ways that the dancers and musicians interact with fixed example Weigong and tarunajaya. These two dances are ones we're going to focus on and they're related, actually. So Tarunajaya is that 20th century dance that represents the changing moods of youth. It's done by a woman traditionally, but it represents a male. Usually it's sort of an androgynous crossover character, not telling any specific story except for these changing moods. But the way she has her fabric, her kind wrapped is in the kind of androgynous style, the babanchi style that is neither male. She doesn't have her shoulders up high and. And neither female style. There's a. That's specific to her that's very interesting. You'll see on Thursday. And Tirudhajaya was based on Legong. Legong is a classical dance that you're going to see a film about. And it's a beautiful, beautiful piece. And it strings together lots and lots of segments to make like a suite of pieces. And. And there are different Legom stories that have different musical accompaniment. Tiru Nijaya originally was called Kabir Legom. And the first person who choreographed it said, I want to make a heavier version of Legong. And then it developed into Tarunajaya, which is slightly different. So in these two dances, they even have some shared melodies. They are fixed, all the onsils. So you know how many times you're going to do this. You're expecting the drum to give this cue and then you know what onsil it's going to be. And it goes very tightly with the dance. 3. You have examples of that would be topang and bodice. So topang is the mask dancing. And baris is the solo warrior dance that I just mentioned that Ida Bodice, who's coming on Thursday, is a special specialist in. And there are other solo dances, mostly male forms, where the dancer cues the drummer who cues the rest of the gamelan. And so he could be just dancing and dancing and dancing and deciding when he wants to give that ang Seoul cue. And I've talked to drummers who say, yeah, the dancer has all the power. I'm getting exhausted playing drum, just waiting for him to do the onsil. And there's a lot of interplay between them. Laigong. Now I'm going to just focus on laigong for a little bit. Was danced by three pre pubescent girls traditionally. And originally it was part of this Sankyang trance ritual. And let me just show you a slide of that now. I have that later. So you've seen this slide before a lot of times. In the Sanghyang Legon trance ritual, the dancers have their eyes closed and yet they dance in perfect sync. The one that I, one of the ones that I went to a long time ago, they were wearing these masks that had no eye holes and they look like Javanese masks. And the same thing was true. And we'll talk about, about trance later on. But basically they go into trance through this group of female chanting as they're kind of leaning over these incense burners. And then once they've reached the state of trance, there are male chakras they're called. They're a group of men who do a kind of vocalized gamelan that we're going to do some of later in the semester. Interlocking parts ta with different rhythms that they would surround the dancers and transport them to the stage area where they do a whole leg on dance in France. And they're kind of. And they were supposed to be three pre pubescent girls and they were always chosen by somebody to be the leg on. Very typecast in terms of the shape of their faces, which characters they were going to play and their kind of personalities. And so it would start. And the Legong dance as it is now always has the Chandong solo first. It's a pure dance in that there's no story yet. And she comes out, she brings the two fans on the stage where they're just folded up sitting there and she, she does a whole dance and then at one point she picks up the fans and two Legongs come out, two other girls and she gives them their fans and then she exits. And they open up their fans and they go into character and it's a very common story. It's lhesome. And that film you're going to see has that one, that story where there's an evil king who abducts the princess and she's rejecting him and all the Ansels go along with that. And then the Chanda comes back as the Garuda bird with these big wings and there's a big battle scene. So they all re enact these stories together and it's accompanied by Gamalan Pale Gane. So the, the word Legong is in there and the Gamelan, the doing of it is Palegonan. And it's very similar to our Gamelan. You can play Legolon on our Gamelan. It has the two veneers and I actually have it open. So let's samso opening the curtain. And just music wise, it started with this. We demonstrated that to you in our music demo where it has this and you have all these ensels and it just switched to this longer, slower melody. Ansel and so death all the time too. Quite a long time. When you see really little girls do it, like 45 year olds, they have to jump down these big temple steps to fight something. And the audience is laughing and they're doing this amazing job. And the goblin doesn't necessarily muscle. It just be between the drummer and the dancer. And it has a very specific drumming part. It's very melodic, small drums, very melodic kind of composite. She's gonna go down on her knees. So you have that lyrical slow melody and it's just. And so it's this transitional melody with its own kotajon that is actually a sped up version of the other part. And it's going to go back to that A melody now back to the A melody. All just sa. You can try to keep a different handle on the melodies. And it's very different from bamboo, right? The same. So when they get to that, that means they're going to go back to the A melody. So I'd like you to be able to watch this enough times on your own and you'll have the link to understand to be able to hear these different melodies. So you can see the leg ons coming out. It's very symmetrical too. After just the whole mirroring of the two leg offs with the tong. Very beautiful as a transition. So she's going to have in their fans and she has a. So this is a different section. It has a different color comic meter called baphan. So remember we did a demo of Baphan soy seer with you. So this is that bapan very evenly distributed be the gongs. And it has a very kind of. It's not up. It's not as intense as a batel, but it's very intense in this section. And this has this little coda kind of closing section of this particular part of the dance. And a lot of times it's very common in these dances where you see the back. The back of the dancer to the audience when they're about to finish. And that's what you just saw. And then they turned around and they were going to go into a very different session. They're going into character now. So now they're in character where this is the princess in the front and the evil king in the back. Very different melody, completely different section. So all of those are. It's a really subtle thing, but it's where the king or prince is trying to kind of molest her, and she turns around and kind of hits him with her fan. Tempo speeds up. So this is the same melody compressed. And so they use. They make use of these materials in a really interesting way, where they can just have the same melody but just sped up. And with Kotech on, it kind of elevates the whole kind of drama here. Knowing the whole thing so well that you know all the options that are coming. This is kind of getting ready for one of them to exit. Okay, new melody. And that's the Garuda theme. So the princess leaves and the Garuda comes on. And it was a Chandong dancer. She has a new role. So we had. That's one of the melodies. New melody here. And they just alternate back and forth with a very complex sequence of onels. As they heard, they kind of strike each other. And that's articulated by the sa. I wish that they had shown the goblin because there's so much going on musically. So we'll be breaking it down for you a little bit on Thursday, but I wanted you to see kind of the whole thing. This is a truncated one. There are much longer Legos, but this is kind of one that's often shown for tourists now. And it might have seemed long, but.